hey curious minds I'm dr. Becky welcome
back to my channel and this week I
thought we'd do something a little bit
different so thought I'd kind of do a
vlog of what projects I have been
working on and what research I've been
up to because some of you might remember
that I went observing back in May you
might be wondering why did you observe
him what for what was the data that
you've got at the end of your night in
the life when I've shown him a video and
so today I thought I'd tell you all
about that now this is work on a project
that I've been doing with Brooke Simmons
from Lancaster and Chris Linn taught
from Oxford as well so let's start with
the why we went observing now I'm really
interested in how supermassive black
holes grow and involve with their
galaxies so we think there's a
supermassive black hole at the center of
every galaxy and the idea and the most
accepted theory is that you have a
merger of two galaxies which you will
then presumably have a merger of the two
supermassive black holes in the center
but also you'll probably destroy any of
that beautiful spiral structure that you
see in galaxies exchange
angular momentum and energy between
stars and make a lot of stuff sink to
the center of that galaxy where you will
probably also feed the black hole again
but you'll also form what we call a
bulge in the center of a galaxy so you
can kind of think of it it's kind of
like a fried egg like the white with the
yellow yolk in the middle like you can
see that really really strongly in a lot
of galaxies and so basically what we
think is that merger equals black hole
growth and forge growth and we see that
in very tight correlations between the
mass of the Bulge of a galaxy and the
mass of the supermassive black hole the
weight of the supermassive black hole
and the same thing for the total mass in
a galaxy and the supermassive black hole
mass as well so what about galaxies that
don't have bulges so we had a sample of
those galaxies about a hundred of them
selected from about a million galaxies
so they're very very rare at least those
with active supermassive black holes
supermassive black holes that you can
detect because they're currently
accreting material they've got a create
a material spiraling around them that's
glowing because of the energy that's
coming off of a black hole now that
might sound weird to a lot of people
because you know black holes don't give
off light you know
anything that flows into a black hole is
lost actually when you have material
spiraling round a black hole there's a
lot of radiation pressure and pressure
for because of gravity from around the
black hole and so a lot of it doesn't
make it into the black hole and instead
it gets thrown out in jet soaring
outflows and energy can hit the gas and
cause it to glow and that's how we can
see that there is a supermassive black
hole there that's currently active we
call that an active galactic nuclei so
we had a sample of galaxies that had
these active galactic nuclei in borås
galaxies so kind of you know missing the
yolk and egg white omelet if you will
and what we wanted to do with them was
measure the black hole mass you know how
heavy are these things are they as heavy
as galaxies that has grown its Borge and
has a massive bulge in the center or are
they piddly you know and and I mean
kiddley and like relative to it was for
astronomy because I'm talking about like
tens of thousands of times the mass of
the Sun and as opposed to like a million
or a billion times the mass of the Sun
so piddly and so we weren't observing
back in 2014 to observe how big of the
black holes in these galaxies and we
were looking at the gas around the black
hole because if it's spiraling it some
of its gonna be blue shift and some of
its gonna be red shifted away from you
so you can figure out how fast it's
going around the black hole and
therefore how big the thing that it's
going around is so you can measure the
mass of the black hole and so with that
we found that actually you find the
exact same correlation for these
galaxies between total mass and black
hole mass and that they were as big as
something that's had a merger and grown
its black hole to like a billion times
the mass of the Sun you could find these
in these borders of galaxies as well so
it challenged that accepted theory for
you grow black holes in mergers because
we were seeing just as big black holes
in a bulge this galaxy that had clearly
never had a manager the other thing that
the data we got from the Palmer
observing trip back in 2014
it showed that around one of the
signatures of the black hole in what we
call the spectra of the galaxies so when
you take the light from a galaxy
and you split it through a prism and you
sort of see it rainbow and you see all
the signatures in that galaxy of the
stars and the AGN so one of those
features is called o3 it's an oxygen
emission line and it mainly comes from
emission from the black hole that's
strong enough to excite oxygen you know
raised electrons around oxygen above
that energy level make them drop back
down to give off light and so if you get
that signature in a galaxy you'll see a
very sort of strong spike a very
specific wavelength from oxygen and so
we did see that except we also saw this
extra component like we couldn't
describe it with sort of a simple nice
normal curve we could only describe it
if there was an extra component there
and also that extra component was blue
shifted as well which means whatever
that was that ever the extra oxygen
light was it was coming towards us with
respect to the rest of the galaxy and so
that suggested that there was what an
outflow from these growing black holes
in these bulges of galaxies which was
really kind of cool because the reason
we were studying them these borgeous
galaxies is what you want to be able to
do is constrain what process is building
these black holes you need to know how
much mass is coming into the black hole
the inflow rate if you will now the
inflow is inflow plus black hole
accretion rate plus outflow so you can't
constrain that inflow and say well it
might be this process because we can get
this much inflow rate from this alone
because if you only measure the
accretion rate of the black hole you've
got that outflow component as well it
might be giving off more mass and it's
actually a kree thing and so it might be
some other process that's growing these
black holes in these bulges galaxies you
know you might have something like the
spiral arms internal in the galaxies are
funneling gas towards the black hole or
you see some galaxies with like a bar
structure in the middle and maybe gas is
flowing along that bar to the black hole
as well like this was the kind of thing
that we were speculating in our previous
paper so this is what we wanted to do we
wanted to observe how much mass was in
this outflow alone
now to do that we have to do a special
way of observing we have to say all we
want is the light around that feature we
don't want any light from the rest of
the spectra we just want light there and
so we can use a very special filter that
only lets in that amount of light just
like you would put like a red filter on
a lamp to make only red light come
through we can just let that specific
wavelength or color of light come
through with these filters up so he
wrote what's called a telescope proposal
we wrote to the people who manage all
the time on telescopes and said please
give us this amount of time on this
telescope because we have this core
sample of galaxies they have weird black
hole masses that we can't explain and we
want to be able to observe that outflow
and we want to be able to observe the
outflow from these galaxies with the
narrow band filters that you have
available at the observatory and the
ultimate goal was to get how much light
is coming through in that feature around
oxygen and so then you just get the
emission from the central black hole and
outflow as well but then that sort of
shifted up from zero a certain amount by
just emission from galaxies as a whole
so you also need to know how much light
is coming from the what we call the
continuum there's sort of galaxy level
by observing just a little bit sort of
along from that feature as well and then
you can subtract the two and just get
left with the black hole and the outflow
and then you can be like okay so how
bright is that outflowing gas therefore
how much mass of gas must be in there
how big is it makes some assumptions on
like how fast the emission from the
black hole has been traveling so then
you can put like a rate of emission from
the black hole on that outflow and then
you're left with like I said accretion
rate at the black hole you can measure
from the brightness of that central
emission and then you've got inflow
outflow accretion rate and you can say
okay so maybe we're getting like five
solar masses or masses of the Sun per
year out flowing from the black hole the
accretion rate at the black hole is like
three solar masses a year so we need
eight solar masses per year somehow in
flowed to that black hole what processes
can do that and perhaps it's kind of
like a slow and steady like growth of
the black hole rather than like
catastrophic like merger event that
comes in and just destroys everything
and grows it really big really quickly
in like a short space of time so we put
this proposal into time for the
telescope committee and they said yep
we like that here's three nights in may
go observing so I went to California to
get this data which was a fantastic
experience like if anybody lives in the
Bay Area San Francisco San Jose like I
really encourage you to actually go
visit up at the observatory up there
because it is so beautiful and they have
a visitor center and it's fantastic
because there's all the history of
astronomy that's been done there it's
been a lot of standards for astronomy
observed there and a lot of these
features these emission and absorption
features in galaxies spectra and star
spectra that have been defined at the
Lick Observatory and there's all these
posters everywhere for astronomers up on
the mountain that I like beware snakes
beware mountain lions I think that's
great but it's gonna be dark mostly demo
up there the most of the time that I'm
awake be sure I'm not gonna be able to
see if there's a mountain lion stalking
me or a snake stalking me it definitely
puts a damper on going outside at night
and looking at the sky because you're
terrified that you're gonna become like
a mountain lions next meal while you're
up there but data was still obtained
despite mountain lions so I'm gonna show
you now like what some of those images
actually looks like so Chile office
welcome to the office this is where the
magic happens very exciting very so to
have like my own office now as well but
what I wanted to show you with what the
court images look like so this is a
galaxy here so this is one of the ones
that we observed I dubbed this um
Hermione because I wanted to name them
after all I'm Harry Potter characters
but you can see you can see the the
central very bright spot at the galaxy
you can see this sort of bar feature
running through the galaxy noise so you
can and also you can see the spiral arms
as well rather galaxies which is kind of
cool you'll see that it's kind of noisy
there's like lots of speckle in the
background you can see like the ring of
weather filters let light in as well
which is kind of cool but I can play
with the scale on this image so I'm
going to do here and I kept over this
gaile to make sure that the noise sort
of disappears out I'd like the lower
which one sort of like level you
actually see in the image so you can see
the galaxy a bit clearer so this is what
it looks like boss there's lots and lots
of sources of noise in this image though
so it's a source of noise include like
just the response of the actual detector
itself you have to be able to sort of
take what's called a dark noise field
where you like close the shutter and all
you do is literally expose a CCD with
nothing there and you'll get noise in
the detector you then also got like
what's called the bias which is the
response of the texture as well which is
kind of like how much light it detects
in certain places on the detector you
got to remove that you've got to remove
noise from the sky as well so like the
sky will be glowing from light pollution
and just from general emission as well
like reflected light through the
atmosphere you have to remove that from
the image there's a lot to do to the
images before you can even analyze them
properly another thing in cosmic rays
cosmic fries are well annoying to an
astronomer you have to remove them all
the time they look like a hot pixels
they're just really bright on your image
and you try to remove those as well so
lots and lots to do to the images so
those are the things that I've already
done to the image so I'll show you what
one of those looks like so let's just
bring this back up on the computer so
this is what like a reduced image of
that same galaxy looks like you can see
it in so much more detail now I've also
like labeled where they're very central
bright this point of the galaxy is in
that central bit so that is the image
that was been reduced for the sky noise
and the renoise the bias ones and
everything around that oxygen 3 emission
line like in the galaxy and so we should
be probing there like stuff that is
coming from the galaxy and the black
hole as well and then if I scroll over
you can see the image which is taken of
just the Galaxy itself so like that's
all like the background light from stars
just around that wavelength and so what
we're gonna do is take this image off
this other image as well and then see
what we're left with and see if we can
see anything that's like outside of the
black hole and that we can
say okay this isn't coming from the
central bay at the edge and this is
actually an outflow so next steps dudu
that's what's on my list for today
there's still a lot for me to do I still
have to calibrate the images where you
actually set turn sort of counts on the
detector and like real energy units that
you're getting in terms of the energy
given off by the gas in image I'm gonna
do that by using what's called the
standard Stars so standard stars are
very well observed stars we know exactly
how much energy they give out across
their entire wavelength range so we
observe those throughout the night as
well through all the narrow band filters
so we could say this is how much energy
you get through the filter for this
exposure time I still have to subtract
you know that nice continuum galaxy
level from the main image as well just
to see what we get left with and see if
we can actually pick out the outflow
itself from that central component like
if we got good enough data to do it
maybe we will maybe we will and see how
many we actually detect these things in
as well because we might sort of have
duds with a lot of them we might not be
at the right sort of observing angle to
actually pick out from the central
component it might be coming directly
towards us we just don't know so it's
gonna be a paper that sort of outlines
all of the steps that we've taken to
allies the data it's gonna explain all
the background of the sample as well the
publication that we end up with and then
hopefully be like hey here's this
outflow we detected therefore what
process is actually driving this so I'm
really excited to actually put all this
down on paper or in pixels if you will
like on a computer and share it with the
side if it were once it's done and until
then I'm gonna be sharing with you guys
what the journey has been like what has
it been like analyzing the data it's
been a bit frustrating until now because
it's been a bit of a learning curve and
also it's a kind of a side project so
I'm doing this along with all my other
research projects that I'm working on at
the minute too so I'll try and update
you guys every couple months so to just
let you know how it's going but until
then dr. Becky over and out
you